Working group for Reference Spec (#114)
opencontainers/tob: proposals/wg-reference-spec.md

# OCI Working Group: Reference Spec

# Reference Spec OCI Working Group - Governance Charter

This document describes the basic governance principles for the Reference Spec Working Group (the “WG”).

The WG operates as an OCI Working Group under the [Open Container Initiative (OCI) Charter](https://github.com/opencontainers/tob/blob/master/CHARTER.md), which describes the responsibilities of the OCI Technical Oversight Board (the "TOB”). The WG is established by the TOB as an OCI Working Group pursuant to the OCI Charter. Accordingly, the WG will operate in accordance with the OCI Charter and OCI's other policies and procedures, supplemented by the details below.

## Purpose

References are a string that is used by runtimes and other OCI registry clients to retrieve a container image.
They are currently a convention, used by many clients, adopted from Docker and implemented in distribution/distribution.
This WG seeks to define the syntax and parsing of a reference as an OCI spec.

> ## Scope

Reviewer: Does this cover the reference string for local OCI archives?

Author: Is that [OCI Image Layout](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/image-layout.md)? I've updated this with a link to make it clear that's what I meant by OCI Layout.

* Document the existing convention used by runtimes and other OCI registry clients.
* Specify the syntax for references to an OCI Layout manifest, including support for a tag or digest.
* Define how the syntax can be extended to support other use cases, including:

>   * Alternate layer formats

Reviewer: Isn’t this the scope of the image-spec?

* Define how the syntax can be extended to support other use cases, including:
  * Alternate layer formats
  * Immutable tags
  * Selecting an artifact that refers to another manifest (e.g. signature or SBOM)
  * Querying content from a pull through cache serving multiple registries (see [distribution-spec PR #66](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/pull/66))
* Provide backwards compatibility by using the existing reference convention from [distribution/reference](https://github.com/distribution/reference) when feasible.

## Out of Scope

* This WG will be limited to the creation of a new spec, and is not expected to impact other OCI specs.

## Intended work product

* Create a `reference-spec` with a formal specification for parsing a reference string.
* Provide a Go implementation of the spec.

## Proposed Owners

The following have agreed to participate in the working group, review progress, report progress back to the OCI community, and present the results to the TOB once the working group has completed its objectives.

* Brandon Mitchell

> * **additional volunteers needed**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Vishal Choudhary
* **additional volunteers needed**
```

I am happy to be involved. 

I am the author of image library proposal in Kubernetes. I also maintain image verification in [Kyverno](https://github.com/kyverno/kyverno)

Reviewer: me too, as a maintainer of containerd, BuildKit, Moby, etc.

Author: Added. Were any of those projects intended to be listed as stakeholders too?

> * **additional volunteers needed**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
James Hewitt
* **additional volunteers needed**
```

Would love to help out. Reviewer for the distribution project, including it's reference implementation.

Author: Added, and I included distribution as a stakeholder project. Let me know if that wasn't your intention.

# OCI Working Group: Reference Spec

## Reference Spec OCI Working Group - Governance Charter

This document describes the basic governance principles for the Reference Spec Working Group (the “WG”).

The WG operates as an OCI Working Group under the [Open Container Initiative (OCI) Charter](https://github.com/opencontainers/tob/blob/master/CHARTER.md), which describes the responsibilities of the OCI Technical Oversight Board (the "TOB”). The WG is established by the TOB as an OCI Working Group pursuant to the OCI Charter. Accordingly, the WG will operate in accordance with the OCI Charter and OCI's other policies and procedures, supplemented by the details below.

## Purpose

References are a string that is used by runtimes and other OCI registry clients to retrieve a container image.
They are currently a convention, used by many clients, adopted from Docker and implemented in distribution/distribution.

> This WG seeks to define the syntax and parsing of a reference as an OCI spec.

Reviewer 4: "define" is a loaded word for me here, given the pre-existing nature of the relevant format -- would prefer a word like "document"

Also, "in the OCI" instead of "as an OCI spec" (because as I've noted prior, I don't think this should be new a spec, but declaring that it _will_ be a new spec right off the bat in the WG proposal is definitely premature).

```suggestion
This WG seeks to document the syntax and parsing of a reference within the OCI.
```

or

```suggestion
This WG seeks to spec the syntax and parsing of a reference within the OCI.
```

## Scope

* Document the existing convention used by runtimes and other OCI registry clients.
* Specify the syntax for references to an [OCI Image Layout](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/7b36cea86235157d78528944cb94c3323ee0905c/image-layout.md) manifest, including support for a tag, digest, or a full registry/repository name.
* Define how the syntax can be extended to support other use cases, including:
  * Alternate layer formats
  * Immutable tags
  * Selecting an artifact that refers to another manifest (e.g. signature or SBOM)

>   * Querying content from a pull through cache serving multiple registries (see [distribution-spec PR #66](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec/pull/66))

Reviewer 4: This is all what I'd describe as "Referrers 2.0" (the cautionary tales I referenced earlier) - stretch goals that look more like designing a new thing than documenting an existing thing, and I'm pretty strongly opposed to including these in the first pass of explicit spec language for "references" in the OCI.  Let's start smaller and just have an explicit spec for the thing that currently exists and has seen wide adoption for ~10+ years, _then_ we can talk about expansion possibilities with less fog.

Reviewer 5: I agree here. There are many places that could refer to a spec documenting the existing state, that would be, for backward compatibility reasons with handling existing inputs, ~unable to adopt new many plausible new syntaxes (there are only so many ASCII characters, and for readability, some are more attractive than others, so conflicts are likely).

The list above is also unclear about the target user — some seem to be relevant to running containers, some to building them, some for, I guess, managing a registry, some for… I don’t know, guessing, purely internal uses _within_ a build system/registry?

---

Philosophically, there are many data transfer / RPC mechanism that can be used to add such parameters to operations _where the parameters make sense_; and clear separation between data/metadata is essential. I strongly think that adding a field is almost always preferable to adding extra syntax within an existing string field.

The one exception is if the string field is so extremely widespread that adding a field everywhere we have the existing string is unfeasible. [E.g. we have ended up with the concept of a “slash-separated [0-terminated] file path” although that is, in many ways, flawed.] But, such a widespread use almost always implies that the specifics of the format are hard-coded in many places, and various extensions / other string formats assume that the format will not change.

---

I can imagine an effort to add features / drive a cross-vendor consensus for a _single specific use case_. E.g., maybe there is some feature that would be really valuable to have in K8s pod specs, and equivalent container image references in other “run a container from this image” orchestration systems. That is a reasonably bounded problem where clear benefits can be articulated.

I think add ing features that could benefit various sort-of-related but rather different use cases like (running / publishing / downloading / SBOMs / graph queries), where most of the proposed features would be irrelevant to any single user but many interoperability / backward compatibility concerns would be a concern for many such users, seems unlikely to succeed.

Author: > Let's start smaller and just have an explicit spec for the thing that currently exists and has seen wide adoption for ~10+ years, then we can talk about expansion possibilities with less fog.

If the thing specified cannot be extended, there will be no "then". This isn't defining the possible extensions, just making it possible for extensions to be created. The result is likely limiting the character set for various fields so that characters are available to mark future extensions.

> I strongly think that adding a field is almost always preferable to adding extra syntax within an existing string field.

I see a reference more as a URI than as a pointer to a tag on a registry. The tag pointer was already extended to allow for pointers to a digest. With referrers and people mounting OCI volumes, I can see a request for a reference to a referrer to an image. This is going to keep happening, e.g. with a pull through proxy that can proxy multiple registries, we will lose the ability to directly pull content from the proxy using the current reference syntax.

> * Provide backwards compatibility by using the existing reference convention from [distribution/reference](https://github.com/distribution/reference) when feasible.

Reviewer 4: This increases my confusion -- we're trying to talk about "backwards compatibility" but we're explicitly trying to design a whole new thing?

Author: We're defining something that can be an in-place upgrade for tooling that currently uses the distribution/reference strings. v1.0 may end up being the current state of distribution/reference, but v* should avoid changes that break users who depend on the current string syntax. New features should be additive in a way that can be distinguished from current use cases, without ambiguity.

## Out of Scope

> * This WG will be limited to the creation of a new spec, and is not expected to impact other OCI specs.

Reviewer 4: As noted above, I strongly disagree with this conclusion, but also believe it's premature to decide that this should be a completely net-new spec.

> The goal here is essentially to take the Grammar from https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/distribution/reference@v0.6.0#pkg-overview and write slightly more words around it, especially describing the docker.io, docker.io/library/, and :latest defaults, right?

This isn't very big, and I don't think we should encourage it to be.

Author: I don't think the size of the work should determine whether it's a new spec, but rather whether it fits within the definition of an existing spec. Looking at image-spec:

> The OCI Image Format project creates and maintains the software shipping container image format spec (OCI Image Format).

I don't think we fit there. And for distribution-spec:

> The OCI Distribution Spec project defines an API protocol to facilitate and standardize the distribution of content.

We only fit there if we are deciding in advance to only allow references to content on a registry, and not to any other way of storing images, e.g. the OCI Image Layout.

The following have agreed to participate in the working group, review progress, report progress back to the OCI community, and present the results to the TOB once the working group has completed its objectives.

* Akihiro Suda
* Brandon Mitchell
* James Hewitt
* Vishal Choudhary
* **additional volunteers needed**

## Stakeholders

OCI Projects, non-OCI projects, or organizations sponsoring the working group and participating in the implementation and use case validation of the work done by the group.

* distribution
* regclient

> * **additional volunteers needed**

Reviewer: containerd, nerdctl, Moby, BuildKit can be added here?
cc @dmcgowan @tonistiigi @thaJeztah

Author: Is that a question to your co-maintainers or a request for me to add it?
